All right, our next speaker is
Representing the year 2019 and he's also spoke at 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23
And I always put him toward the very end to make sure people stick around because he's awesome
All right, you thought I was gonna insult him a little bit. No, that was awesome because he's awesome guy
And he's been held at gunpoint twice
But he's never been as scared as when he was teaching his son to drive
Please everyone a really big welcome for Max. Hello. You okay?
Great so maybe for the first time here. I'm not talking about modeling. It's a new experience for me
Hopefully for you too. I'm gonna talk about shiny live
Has anybody ever heard of that yet? Okay, good. All right
Excellent. So before that I want to talk about Quarto
I didn't think I'd have to introduce this
But I did actually meet a few people this week who had never heard of it
Quarto is sort of like the next generation of like the R markdown family of stuff like blog down and all the other downs
It's independent of R. So it's like a it's its own
Application you install you can use it with Python or Julia or bash or whatever you want to use
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to talk about using shiny inside of Quarto
My main application is for books, but you can use it for like these slides in particular
Or other things or blogs or whatnot. We were kind of looking into of Hadley's out there
I hope we are looking into using it for our package down sites, which would be a nice change
And then shiny, you know, I'm pretty sure everybody here's heard of shiny and probably telling you things you already know
but historically if you want to deploy shiny app like
Have somebody interact with it who's not on your computer or not you or whatnot
You basically had to use a server so you could get your own shiny license or you know
Download shiny and build your own server and manage all that yourself where you could use one of the hosted services
positive shiny apps.io and posit connect
But just to tell you what you probably owned already know is if you have a shiny app all that the the software and everything
Sits on the server
Maybe data is already there. Maybe you upload data or whatnot. And then your your your
TV your phone your computer
It's just a terminal that you interact with it
It sends messages Shiner the server the server does calculations and brings it back and you know, that's pretty traditional
Just as an example app. This is something where if anybody ever heard of you map, it's like it's supposed to be like a souped-up
PCA
It makes really cool looking pictures
It's not very great for modeling
But you know in talking about and describing it I wanted to have something that could show like hey
It's not really stable
like if you
Initialize it in a bunch of different ways or change some of the parameters a little bit like you can get very different
Results and so for me in my application
I want to build books in
HTML that has like a lot of things like this that you can interact with them instead of it being like
Let me tell you about what happened in the static figure
And so that's sort of like my application of abusing shiny with quarter at least
So along came web are so web are is like just something it just seems like magic to me
It probably is something called WebAssembly was built a while ago and in Python was eventually built inside of WebAssembly
And now we have it with R. So what you do is what WebAssembly does is basically
Builds are into a binary format that you can then access in JavaScript and so on
So it's not like you're rebuilding R to the application that's on your computer
You're building it to be used on the web and in the browser. That's the point
So basically JavaScript is your interface there if you want more information
Positive about a year or so ago
I'm hired a guy named George stag who is doing a lot of work on this on his own and then we hired him and
Brought him in to develop web are more
Extensively and just basically fund that and this link to this video is really really good if you want to learn more about WebAssembly
George manages a repository. It's not Cran, but like a repository where he's taking all the Cran
Packages in with WebAssembly building a binary version of those so that you can use it with web R
And if you look at the statistics there, there's like two interesting sort of differentiations is
As of like today
There's about 19,000 packages built with WebAssembly, which is about 94% of Cran
But that's 6% that's missing or things that other package depend on so that's number of packages built
but the packages you can actually
Use are somewhat lower than that because if you depend on any of those 6% that are left out
You can't really load the package
So he's just slowly whittling away at all the sort of crazy things as you can imagine that happen inside of our packages
But it's it's fairly complete at this point. I feel I've yet to try to list something or try to use something
That's not really available. So it might sort of be in the tail of things that are used
So just to give you a sense of how web R works
This is a like the most simple example I had is you know
You you get a terminal you execute it and this is all running inside my browser
so just be clear there's a version of R that's been packaged up with any packages that you need and that is embedded into the
Website that my browser is serving. Okay
So it's all local and I'll talk about that more in a minute. If you want another package, let's say
Deployer
You can do that and of course the fonts too big here, but you can see it got it and loaded it pretty oops pretty quickly
So it's quite amazing
So that's web R and then came along shiny live
So shiny live is like sort of a version of web R that's built to sure serve shiny locally
So no server required the server is kind of like built into your browser at this point
And so what it does is all the computations run locally. So when I start up this particular this is built with shiny live
This these slides. So when I started the slides with Cordo
It loads are it loads the packages that I declare that I've need and then it also builds a shiny serving side that I could
Just use it without sending any
Messages back and forth to an external server
It does almost all the heavy lifting for you and we'll see the almost in just a second
So just to clarify we kind of seem obvious at this point shiny server all the things happen on the server
You're just sending messages back and forth and it's serving you images and and whatever it is that you're looking for in your output
Shiny live downloads are in packages runs everything locally
Okay
Now if you want to get set up with Cordo
the first thing you have to do is go to a terminal inside of your Cordo project and run this command and
Essentially Cordo has a bunch of extensions you can use for various things like if you want to use like font awesome
there's an extension for that and so on but the shiny live extension does is gives you all the
infrastructure to run shiny in the way that we're going to do and then one more thing is the way Cordo runs is
Everything is done in markdown. So when you like
When you process your files, you get a markdown file at the end of that and then we use
Pandoc to basically convert it to HTML or tech or whatever it is that you're gonna like render it in like your target
Output format. And so what you have to do is you have to sort of shim that process and so a Cordo filter
Is something that will basically not interrupt but sort of get in the inside of that process of making the markdown
Converting to Pandoc and then compiling it into the final format
And so you just have somewhere in your Cordo yaml file
You have to have a filters argument and just tell it to treat shiny live a little bit more differently
And after that you're done you can start writing code chunks
So in code chunks and are at least if you're used to like knitter and our markdown
You would just use like bracket our bracket and that's telling it that you know
I have an R chunk instead of doing that you shiny live dash R and I should also say
That everything I'm telling you about R is also true about Python. So we have shiny for Python
We have shiny live Python was the original sort of like first version of that and so on
Of course quarter works with Python
So if you're more of a Python person all this will also be true for you
Except for our beat Python and not are here
One other thing you have to do is you have to declare this one option called standalone and set it to true which makes it
Work inside of Cordo and then just put your shiny app in so it's it's pretty it's pretty simple
Like if you're used to writing shiny and you just do the setup then now you have shiny locally, which is kind of amazing
How do you declare packages so you're gonna use various packages like in that that you map example
I have like GG plot like one of the color palette packages as well as deep liar loading in there. And so
Shiny live in web are need to know what you need so it can go out and get them
And so the way you would do that is it uses our end if you've ever used that so
You just say like library deep liar and it knows to go out and get it now
There might be we do this in tiny models a lot
You might have packages you went there, but you're not going to directly look attach them
You want to call them by namespace or you know, it's an imported package for you
and so what you can do in that case is you can just declare it as a library like you'd normally would just comment at
That out and then or and we'll pick that up
So right now what it does is when you build when you render your your shiny app
It goes out it downloads are and then it goes to the the wasm code repository and gets
The current version of that package and that's what you use, but we think a lot about reproducibility
So we're continually George we here's George
We're continually working on making that happen more. So the there's I don't think it's been committed yet
But he was telling me what they're gonna do is at the time that you build the app not the render time for the build
Time that they'll go out to the wasm repository get the versions that are like the most recent versions
then when you built it and then sort of like either cache them or
Or he'll just keep keep he'll retain all the old versions all the binary versions these packages
So you can get probably get the package version that you started with
Originally or something that's pretty close to it
and I imagine this is gonna get more sophisticated as time goes on because there's a lot we could probably do with RM to get
Around this like a like a lock file or snapshot
But we're not quite there yet
All right, so how do you get your code in like if you're not just gonna if you have like a long shiny app
You just don't want to paste that into some Cordo doc
Probably and how do you get data in like you might want to upload a CSV file or let the users do that and analyze?
It and this is where it gets like the almost this is where it gets interesting
There's really one simple simple principle that you have to remember, which is this
This you're in JavaScript actually your own web assemblies world now
But you know that you're sort of constrained a little bit
So getting data in is a little bit more difficult because if you've used Cordo at least when I started using this
I was like well if I have a code chunk that makes some data frame or some model object and I go to do the
Next code chunk. I have that just laying around just go ahead and use that right doesn't work like that
It's basically spawning another our process inside the browser that is basically clean
So that's why we list the packages we just don't
Inherit the ones we've already loaded or attached. So you have to do a little bit extra a little bit differently
Techniques to load data or source files and things like that. So web web assembly doesn't really let you just like open a network connection
So you can see if you want to learn more because I don't understand this part
You can go to the github issue around this but curl is definitely a no-no. So if you've been using curl
That's not gonna be allowed and what George has done is he's patched download dot file and base are so what we'll use
Basically a separate protocol to get the files and that works pretty well
For me, it's a little like more simple than maybe what you're gonna deal with because I keep all my stuff on github in a public
Repo, so you'll see how I do in a minute
But but this is the only thing that might trip you up a little bit in terms of like well
How do I get my data in in a way that shiny live and web assembly will permit and again?
If you want to read more there's an issue here that you could upvote or get feedback on
Now Gordon Shotwell who's in the shining group like succinctly put he's like I'm terrified of this in a way
Because we're gonna have people that are going to you know
Not realize that anything data or code that's in their shiny app is available locally to whoever has the URL, right?
Yeah, so he's like
And so any data you have goes to the client any code you have goes to the client if you
Accidentally maybe have an object that has some API key that you need for the app. It's available to the client
So you're happy you like super careful about what you put in the app
even if it's like you're giving somebody access to upload CV CSV files to analyze or something like that or
Let them connect to a database. You just have to be cognizant that anything that gets in there
Theoretically could be used by somebody else or accessed by somebody else
So
Here's sort of the example pattern that I have here is I have like a figure chunk
Single equal true and then you know, I'll start with some library calls. So it I could say it's a tiny model stock now
Not really
And then what I'll do is like I have like for that for that you map example
I've just pre computed all the configurations. I'm going to use in in shiny
So I just have our data file out there on github and then I can basically use the github raw
URL structure here. It's the same
Structure. It's just has a different route of the URL to load the data
and then I like my
Shiny stuff to be a little bit more modular because the book has a certain styling that you do beforehand and I don't want to
Replicate that so you can just like down or source
specific our files
That are somewhere that's accessible and then you just return the app
I'm telling you this in particular because it may seem obvious
But the two sort of nuances that are true right now
But I'm guessing what might get better over time is when RM scans your code to see what packages you need if those package
Declarations are in the sourced file. It won't see them
And the other sort of constraint is for some reason if you if you return the app in the R file
It also won't load the app. So you have to explicitly return it here
Okay, so that's little nuances that I think I don't know if they're oversights but are something we can just make the experience better for
Just to give you a sense of that you map one
Here's what it looks like and I have like a set of file that I source and then the actual you map app
One nice thing about books is you can do a lot of cross-referencing
So we have a way to like, you know, make the shiny up an actual like figure in your book
Not just something that's sitting there. So
So there's a little bit of quarter work you do here to make it work, but it's it's pretty simple
So
Some of you might be wondering like why would process do this like why would George do this right?
He's like we sell shiny we sell shiny servers and pause and things like that and the answer, you know
And I remember when I first met him not long after he was hired
We were talking about this and like how they might be like sure
I don't know if I'm saying something I shouldn't but like I was like, so why are we do?
I mean, I want to do this, but like why are we doing it?
And at the time I think George said that you know
I think maybe we talked to some people in our company. They were like look
We know somebody's gonna do this, right?
We can't we wouldn't try to stop it
but what we should do is we should bring it in and make sure that we fund it and support it and nurture it in
A way that we can so that when we go to use web R or WebAssembly, we get the best possible experience
So George is in posit. He does if you ever have a chance to meet him
The guy is crazy amazing. He's Intel just incredible technically
But I don't know that we're terribly worried about shiny live because it's really not the answer to a lot of things that you might
Want to do so, you know, you could be running this on your TV, right?
Your computing power is not that great
You have to basically assume like a lowest common denominator in terms of what resources people have to run the shiny app
I've already mentioned about code and data security
And so that might be sort of a no-no for what you're doing and also just moving data around might be expensive
So, you know my you know, I'm loading for the book
I'm loading like I don't know 80 70 80 megabyte our data files at most and that takes maybe like a second or two
To do depending on your web connection, and I should also say I'll do that at the end here
It's really faster than I thought it would be as you're downloading R and packages in our data
But if you're like, hey, let's do deep learning and shiny live. It's like that's probably not gonna be
I don't know what kind of computer you're using but it may not be something that's really realistic
And then, you know, we have connect for good reason like we'll handle authentication
Parameterization reports like cron jobs and all the stuff and it's not like you can't do that yourself
In fact as a company we've you know
Tarif has always said that we don't ever want to have anything that we lock you into for money
So we're never gonna have a product that you will have a similar version of product that will make it easier and nicer to use
But you could do it yourself if you wanted to and that's what makes connects it wonderful
You can write cron jobs yourselves
We know how to do this
But to have like technical support and all that done for you is one of the reasons I think that shiny live
For most most commercial people are not going to be canceling their
Their accounts for that. I should also say I meant to do this earlier
Going back to the actual app. Let me just reload it
It may not be accurate because there is some caching that it does
But if you think of I think the our build the binary is like maybe like six or seven
Megabytes and the packages are pretty small even dplyr
and so
Just loading it. I timed it about four or five seconds
So yeah, so it's pretty fast. It's remarkably fast, especially compared to what it was in the first version, you know
And I joke about dplyr, but you know, there's all these people like oh the tiny verse and all their packages
And you have to get like 20 packages
I'm using gdplot and dplyr and that probably has I don't know
I'm gonna guess like a dozen or so dependencies and it's loading in seconds with the data which is about 20 megabytes
So that that's pretty good in terms of speed
So, yeah
That's pretty much the end of it
If you want to learn more Joe Chang last year's positive conference gave an excellent excellent talk about
Shiny and wasm. It's definitely worth looking at
You know me I'm always for something that's new especially I want to see examples of what other people are doing
So this link here will go out and look for all the github projects that have shiny dash live or shiny dash Python
And then George has some really good applications, too
There's a great talk that he has
But also if you want to think of it in terms of like well
Can we use arrow or like what would we do? So he has a shiny app on his github repository
That
Uses duck DB and parquet files
So if you want to test that out locally and say like how you know, would that work?
Well, you can go out and test it now
So thanks for speaking, especially thanks to Nicole
Like we've called her out a couple times and she's like, you know
The the I don't know the Cub Scout den mother of the place. She literally like keeps everything running. No offense Jared, but it's true
So, you know big thanks to her and Jared and all the people especially you put web R and shiny live together
You